

“Awareness, acceptability, trust”
Participants’ responses and the types of people that we identified
suggest that there is work to be done in a number of areas if we are
to design IoT experiments based on an appropriate understanding and
anticipation of how people will respond to them. 

With top-down - or management or technophile-driven - experiments,
there is likely to be some disjunct between the vision of what could
or should be achieved (what is promised) and what is actually
delivered or accomplished. … “over-collection” of data 
…
We might define a ‘successful’ experiment as one that leads to
awareness, acceptability and trust. Or we could define it as an
experiment that either a) accomplishes the experimenter’s goals
without adverse reactions or b) involves participants in co-creating
the goals and leads to a positive experience that IoT has
‘accomplished’ something for the participants.  

We propose three principles for awareness, acceptability and trust.

\paragraph{Purpose} Monitoring should be a time-bounded activity with
a clearly defined purpose. Individuals who might be affected by the
monitoring should be informed about the what, why and how of decisions
made based on the data collected. Overmonitoring by “well-meaning
technophiles” should be avoided when simpler interventions could
achieve the desired goal. 

\paragraph{Transparency} Anyone affected by the monitoring should be
informed about what data is being collected and should be able to
access an easily interpretable explanation of this, for example
through data visualisation. Physical signage in monitored areas is
more effective than email communication. If possible, some version of
the raw data should be accessible to anyone interested in exploring it
and comparing their interpretations to that of the decision-makers. 

\paragraph{Participation} In the case of workplace monitoring, there
is an opportunity and a need to move beyond the narratives of resource
efficiency, maximising productivity and incentivising specific
behaviours. Trust in management decision-making has been compromised
by the use of data to justify cost-cutting and provide only a minimum
acceptable level of facilities and resources. 

New narratives built around trust and valuing individuals can be
created by involving employees in identifying the issues that most
affect their performance, comfort, health and well-being and
determining how and whether monitoring could be used to address these
issues effectively. The engagement process can be structured to offer
employees freedom, creativity, and a sense of agency. 

The narrative of the value of the Internet of Things to maximise
resource efficiency and improve user experience is widely embedded and
offers a seemingly easy ‘quick win’ application. However, how such an
application is designed and delivered can influence its acceptability
and either limit or expand its potential to create shared value. These
three guidelines can help to overcome skepticism and ensure that IoT
monitoring projects incorporate a broader set of values and
beneficiaries. 

%%% Local Variables: ***
%%% mode:latex ***
%%% TeX-master: "main.tex"  ***
%%% End: ***
